---
layout: post
title:  "D3 Maps: Part 3"
summary: D3 Maps
date: 2015-07-28
categories: D3
tags: D3
published: false
---

[OPEN]:

- map showing winning party by constituency: with jquery simply add the party name as a style to the class attribute and create exactly the same style names in the CSS.
- advanced zoom function: when user clicks on constituency, zoom in to this area (see example [here](http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/election-2015-32624405))
- add pop-overs to show more details by constituency
- highlight borders of countries (maybe counties as well?) and provide election result summaries for them
- In CDE, how to only load the shapefile once? If the user chooses a different measure, we don't want to reload the shapefile. And me also have to make sure that any previously set CSS styles get removed before new ones get applied (as in some cases we don't have data for all constituencies


# Simplifying the topography file

## Best approach

1. Upload it to [Mapshaper](http://mapshaper.org) and use their simplify function. Make sure you click the **Repair** feature if available. Download as GeoJSON so that we can still define the id etc. (See if you can do a similar thing in QGIS).
2. Use the topojson command to convert GeoJSON file.
3. Remove transform (scale, translate) at the end of the file.

QGIS: Vector > Geometry Tools > Simplify Geometries: Hm, not really great results

## Alternative

The topojson file is still fairly large, let's try simplifying it further. The excellent article [Spatial data on a diet: tips for file size reduction using TopoJSON](http://zevross.com/blog/2014/04/22/spatial-data-on-a-diet-tips-for-file-size-reduction-using-topojson/) by Zav Ross outlines a few possibilties to slim down the file:

```
topojson \
  --id-property PCON13CDO \
  --properties name=PCON13NM \
  -q 5000 \
  -s 1e-8 \
  -o constituencies.topo.json \
  constituencies.json
```

If we check the file size now, we see that our topojson file only takes up only 1.4MB now.

```
topojson \
  --id-property PCON13CDO \
  --properties name=PCON13NM \
  -q 5000 \
  -s 1e-8 \
  -o constituencies.topo.json \
  constituencies.json
```

Always check the output. It is very easy to "destroy" the map by using too much simplification - always properly check the output.